DRA: monitor plugin connection (#131073)
kubernetes/kubernetes: pkg/kubelet/pluginmanager/pluginwatcher/README.md

starts, it has to delete old sockets if they exist and listen anew under the
same filename.

## Monitoring plugin connection

> Kubelet monitors gRPC connection to a plugin using stats connection monitoring
> handler https://github.com/grpc/grpc-go/blob/master/examples/features/stats_monitoring/README.md
> that allows to hook on connection start and stop events. If plugin drops
> connection with Kubelet, it gets automatically unregistered and its resources
> are cleaned up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kubelet monitors the gRPC connection to a plugin's
registration socket using a [stats connection monitoring
handler](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-go/blob/master/examples/features/stats_monitoring/README.md).
Such a handler can observe connection start and stop events.
If a plugin drops the connection with the kubelet, it gets 
automatically unregistered immediately and its resources
are cleaned up. This works because the connection is
using a reliable Unix Domain stream, so loosing the connection
is guaranteed to mean that the peer closes its side of
the connection and not some intermittent network timeout.
```

Is this a correct update?

What about reconnecting to a socket? I can imagine why it's not needed (the plugin cannot reopen the socket without recreating it), but this should be spelled out explicitly as one of the assumptions behind the implementation.

Reviewer: Also, why is monitoring the registration socket sufficient?

Reviewer: This is absolutely worth calling out here, together with the rationale for doing it this way.

Reviewer: I also expect that it could have implications for retries:
- The registration socket might be provided by one container, the service socket by another (ala CSI sidecar deployment).
- Service container restarts, dropping the connect.
- It restarts.
- Does the kubelet re-register the plugin?

Author: It should, because plugin manager monitors socket directory for new entries. When Service container restarts, the socket is closed and deleted and then it's re-created again on the container start.

Reviewer: It seems we are not using the same terminology. Looking at the README.md, "registration socket" and "service socket" are not defined. What I meant is "registration socket" = where the plugin provides the [pluginregistration](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/pluginregistration)/[v1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/pluginregistration/v1) `Registration` service and "service socket" = where the plugin provides the DRA service. You seem to use the opposite definition.

Looks like the README text will need a few more words than "registration socket" to describe what it is monitoring...

Author: > Also, why is monitoring the registration socket sufficient?

Registration socket is re-connected often as far as I remember, so it's not possible to use this approach for it without changing plugin manager, which I was trying to avoid.

Author: > What I meant is "registration socket" = where the plugin provides the [pluginregistration](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/pluginregistration)/[v1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/pluginregistration/v1) Registration service and "service socket" = where the plugin provides the DRA service. You seem to use the opposite definition.

I'm using the same terminology. Connection monitoring is setup in the pkg/kubelet/cm/dra/plugin/plugin.go and uses to serve service connection (NodePrepareResources, NodeUnprepareResources gRPC APIs).

Reviewer: Then I don't understand what you mean with "plugin manager monitors socket directory for new entries".

It monitors `/var/lib/kubelet/plugins_registry`. Where does it monitor the directory that contains the endpoint returned by the plugin? Is that new code that you are adding?

Reviewer: > Registration socket is re-connected often as far as I remember, so it's not possible to use this approach for it without changing plugin manager, which I was trying to avoid.

Not changing the plugin manager makes sense. But that then raises another question: connections to the DRA driver are established when needed and then cached, right?

What if the node is currently idle? Will the kubelet detect that a registered DRA driver isn't really ready to serve requests?

Instead of speculating, would it make sense to do test driven development? You could write tests for the interesting scenarios and then verify that they are handled by the existing code. If not, extend the code.

I can see at least three test scenarios where registration and DRA (= service socket) are different:
- DRA driver comes up, the kubelet connects to the DRA socket, then the DRA driver disconnects the DRA socket.
- DRA driver comes up, registers its DRA socket, but then fails to to listen on that socket (could happen in a sidecar scenario).
- DRA driver comes up, the kubelet connects to the DRA socket, then the plugin restarts and recreates only the DRA socket.

In all scenarios we want the kubelet to treat the DRA driver as not registered immediately, which starts the grace period before it removes ResourceSlices. In the last scenario we want the kubelet to detect that the driver is back and not remove ResourceSlices, as long as it comes back quickly enough.

Similar scenarios minus the second one are possible when registration and DRA socket are identical. This also needs to be tested.

Author: > I also expect that it could have implications for retries:
> 
> * The registration socket might be provided by one container, the service socket by another (ala CSI sidecar deployment).
> * Service container restarts, dropping the connection.
> * It restarts.
> * Does the kubelet re-register the plugin?

According to the https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/128907 it doesn't as registration socket doesn't change, but that's another story. I'm going to address it separately, hopefully by helping to merge proposed solution.

Author: > What if the node is currently idle? Will the kubelet detect that a registered DRA driver isn't really ready to serve requests?

In this case DRA(service) connection is not established yet, correct? Then there is nothing to monitor. So, I'd say this is another case, which can be addressed separately, modifying the plugin manager, for example we can reopen https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/129799 to address this use case.

Author: > DRA driver comes up, the kubelet connects to the DRA socket, then the DRA driver disconnects the DRA socket.
> DRA driver comes up, the kubelet connects to the DRA socket, then the plugin restarts and recreates only the DRA socket.

These 2 cases should be handled by this implementation. I'll try to implement e2e_node tests for them if that's needed.

Author: > DRA driver comes up, registers its DRA socket, but then fails to to listen on that socket (could happen in a sidecar scenario).

This one should be handled separately in my opinion, either by merging https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/128907 or https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/129799.

Author: In short - instead of addressing all possible issues in one PR, I'd prefer to fix them step by step. Monitoring DRA service connection is a first step.

Author: > Let's first extend the README.md with a description of what the code is expected to handle, with an explanation of how, and what it does not handle, again with why. As it stands now, we had to have a long debate over what it really solves.

OK. As most of the implementation is in the DRA plugin code, do you still think this README.md is the right place for its documentation?
I'd rather put it into pkg/kubelet/cm/dra/README.md or pkg/kubelet/cm/dra/plugin/README.md.

Reviewer: Yes, I think it's the right place. It's better to have all information about kubelet plugins in one place.

Author: Updated the README.md again. PTAL.

> **Warning**: Monitoring plugin connection is only supported for DRA at the moment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Warning**: Monitoring the plugin connection is only supported for DRA at the moment.
```

**registration socket** is monitored by the plugin manager. It registers the
plugin when registration socket is created by the plugin and deregisters the
plugin when socket is removed. After registration, the plugin begins serving
gRPC requests over the **service socket**. Monitoring this service socket is
therefore more accurate for detecting the real availability of the plugin.

### How It Works

Internally, the plugin client configures a gRPC stats handler to observe
`ConnStart` and `ConnEnd` events on the service socket connection. The
connection is established over a Unix Domain Socket, which provides reliable
semantics — if the connection drops, it definitively indicates that the plugin
closed its end (e.g., due to crash or shutdown).

1. After successful plugin registration, the client dials the plugin’s
   **service socket** and attaches the stats handler.
2. A long-lived gRPC connection is established and actively monitored.
3. If the plugin process exits and the connection drops, the stats handler
   observes a `ConnEnd` event.
4. This immediately triggers plugin deregistration and removal from the plugin
   manager’s desired state of the world.

> 5. The service socket file is deleted when the plugin terminates, making

Author: > Deleted by whom? The plugin might skip that step.

By the unix socket listener as far as I remember.

> 5. The service socket file is deleted when the plugin terminates, making

Reviewer: If the process is killed, that won't happen. Let's remove the assumption that the service socket file gets deleted, because it is not guaranteed.

>    reconnection impossible unless the plugin re-registers.

Author: > Can't the plugin remove the old service socket and start listening again, without ever doing anything with the registration socket?

I don't think this scenario is realistic, considering that plugins usually call `grpc.Server.Serve` in a go-routine and its failure to serve is considered a fatal error even if processed at all. However, re-registering plugin on `ConnStart` shouldn't be hard to implement, so added to the doc. Thanks for pointing out!

>    reconnection impossible unless the plugin re-registers.

Author: Anything else is still missing in the doc? If not, can you outline e2e tests that need to be implemented?
Here is what I'd test:
- Plugin disconnects and then restarts. It's expected to be deregistered and then registered again.
- Plugin disconnects and then reconnects on the same socket. It's expected to be deregistered and then registered again.
- Plugin registers. The service connection is expected to be established even without any service gRPC calls.

>    reconnection impossible unless the plugin re-registers.

Author: @pohly 
> Can't the plugin remove the old service socket and start listening again, without ever doing anything with the registration socket?

> My expectation is that gRPC would move the connection back to "connected" after some time. It might only happen if there is traffic pending.

I guess it would be another connection and I doubt this scenario is supported by the current code.
Anyway, I tried to simulate this scenario by stopping only DRA gRPC service(tried also closing underlying socket without stopping the service) and keeping registration service running, but I can only see that the old connection ends, but don't see any signs of connection (re)start. I tried this experiment with and without removing a socket file. See 2 latest commits for the implementation details.

This could probably be supported by re-establishing connection from the client (Kubelet) side after the connection drop, but this is another story as far as I understand. We're talking about internal gRPC reconnection mechanisms here, correct? Those either don't exist or don't work in the scenario when unix socket listener closes and opens again on the same socket path. At least this is what I can see with my experiments.

>    reconnection impossible unless the plugin re-registers.

Reviewer: What if the stats handler triggers a reconnect? It could either call https://pkg.go.dev/google.golang.org/grpc#ClientConn.Connect (experimental) or call some gRPC method (which one TBD).

starts, it has to delete old sockets if they exist and listen anew under the
same filename.

## Monitoring Plugin Connection

The Kubelet monitors the gRPC connection to a plugin's **service socket** using a
[gRPC stats handler](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-go/blob/master/examples/features/stats_monitoring/README.md).

This enables the Kubelet to:
- Detect when the plugin process has crashed, exited, or restarted
- Deregister the plugin immediately when the connection is lost
- Trigger cleanup of the plugin’s resources

> **registration socket** is monitored by the plugin manager. It registers the
> plugin when registration socket is created by the plugin and deregisters the
> plugin when socket is removed. After registration, the plugin begins serving
> gRPC requests over the **service socket**. Monitoring this service socket is
> therefore more accurate for detecting the real availability of the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **registration socket** is monitored by the plugin manager. It registers the
plugin when registration socket is created by the plugin and
the GetInfo gRPC call succeeds.
It  deregisters the plugin when the socket is removed.

The plugin should be ready to handle
gRPC requests over the **service socket** that
it returned in response to the GetInfo call because
the kubelet might try to use the service immediately.
Monitoring this service socket is
therefore more accurate for detecting the real availability of the plugin.
```

### How It Works

Internally, the plugin client configures a gRPC stats handler to observe
`ConnBegin` and `ConnEnd` events on the service socket connection. The
connection is established over a Unix Domain Socket, which provides reliable
semantics — if the connection drops, it definitively indicates that the plugin
closed its end (e.g., due to crash or shutdown).

1. After successful plugin registration, the client dials the plugin’s
   **service socket** and attaches the stats handler.
2. A long-lived gRPC connection is established and actively monitored.
3. If the plugin process exits and the connection drops, the stats handler
   observes a `ConnEnd` event.
4. This immediately triggers plugin deregistration and removal from the plugin
   manager’s desired state of the world.

> 5. If the plugin connects again, the stats handler observes a `ConnBegin` event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. If the plugin starts listening again, gRPC automatically reconnects, the stats handler observes a `ConnBegin` event
```

Author: gRPC doesn't automatically reconnects. Kubelet has to do it explicitly.

Reviewer: I'm not convinced that this is true. In general, whether a gRPC connection is established is transparent to the application layer. It issues gRPC requests and gRPC ensures that they get to the server, (re)connecting if necessary.

Reviewer: Do you want to write a stand-alone test for this assumption or shall I?

Author: Yes, I'll do it.

Author: here you go:

server.go
```
package main

import (
	"log"
	"net"
	"os"
	"time"

	"google.golang.org/grpc"
)

func main() {
	socketPath := "/tmp/grpc.sock"
	// Remove socket file if it exists
	if err := os.RemoveAll(socketPath); err != nil {
		log.Fatalf("failed to remove existing socket: %v", err)
	}
	for {
		log.Println("Starting gRPC server...")

		lis, err := net.Listen("unix", socketPath)
		if err != nil {
			log.Fatalf("failed to listen on unix socket: %v", err)
		}

		s := grpc.NewServer()

		go func() {
			if err := s.Serve(lis); err != nil {
				log.Printf("server exited: %w\n", err)
			}
		}()

		time.Sleep(20 * time.Second)
		log.Println("Stopping gRPC server...")
		s.GracefulStop()
		time.Sleep(5 * time.Second)
	}
}

```

client.go
```
package main

import (
        "log"
        "time"

        "google.golang.org/grpc"
        "google.golang.org/grpc/stats"
        "golang.org/x/net/context"
)

const socketPath = "unix:///tmp/grpc.sock"

type connStatsHandler struct{}

func (h *connStatsHandler) TagConn(ctx context.Context, info *stats.ConnTagInfo) context.Context {
        return ctx
}

func (h *connStatsHandler) HandleConn(ctx context.Context, s stats.ConnStats) {
        switch s.(type) {
        case *stats.ConnBegin:
                log.Println("[StatsHandler] Connection began")
        case *stats.ConnEnd:
                log.Println("[StatsHandler] Connection ended")
        }
}

func (h *connStatsHandler) TagRPC(ctx context.Context, info *stats.RPCTagInfo) context.Context {
        return ctx
}

func (h *connStatsHandler) HandleRPC(ctx context.Context, s stats.RPCStats) {}

func main() {
        conn, err := grpc.Dial(
                socketPath,
                grpc.WithInsecure(),
                grpc.WithBlock(),
                grpc.WithStatsHandler(&connStatsHandler{}),
                grpc.WithBackoffMaxDelay(5*time.Second),
        )
        if err != nil {
                log.Fatalf("failed to connect: %v", err)
        }
        defer conn.Close()

        log.Println("Client is connected. Waiting indefinitely.")
        select {}
}
```

Here is what I see on the server console:
```
$ go run server.go
2025/05/20 18:40:05 Starting gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:40:25 Stopping gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:40:30 Starting gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:40:50 Stopping gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:40:55 Starting gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:41:15 Stopping gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:41:20 Starting gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:41:40 Stopping gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:41:45 Starting gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:42:05 Stopping gRPC server...
2025/05/20 18:42:10 Starting gRPC server...
```

and on the client console:
```
$ go run client.go
2025/05/20 18:40:12 [StatsHandler] Connection began
2025/05/20 18:40:12 Client is connected. Waiting indefinitely.
2025/05/20 18:40:25 [StatsHandler] Connection ended
```

Author: It works only when there is active RPC traffic. I can see reconnections after adding a simple Ping service:

```
$ go run client.go
2025/05/20 19:49:40 [StatsHandler] Connection began
2025/05/20 19:49:40 Client is connected. Sending Ping every 3 seconds...
2025/05/20 19:49:43 Ping OK
2025/05/20 19:49:46 Ping OK
2025/05/20 19:49:49 Ping OK
2025/05/20 19:49:52 Ping OK
2025/05/20 19:49:54 [StatsHandler] Connection ended
2025/05/20 19:49:55 Ping failed: rpc error: code = Unavailable desc = connection error: desc = "transport: Error while dialing: dial unix /tmp/grpc.sock: connect: no such file or directory"
2025/05/20 19:49:58 Ping failed: rpc error: code = Unavailable desc = connection error: desc = "transport: Error while dialing: dial unix /tmp/grpc.sock: connect: no such file or directory"
2025/05/20 19:50:01 [StatsHandler] Connection began
2025/05/20 19:50:01 Ping OK
2025/05/20 19:50:04 Ping OK
2025/05/20 19:50:07 Ping OK
```

Author: In practice it means that we can only detect that the plugin is back online when we send [Un]Prepare requests to it, which is not exactly what we want, but probably better than nothing.

Reviewer: Or use Connect (https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/131073#discussion_r2097849217).

Connect feels more appropriate for our purposes, the only drawback is that it is marked "Experimental". I think I would be okay with taking that risk.

Author: I'd simply re-dial by calling [getOrCreateGRPCConn](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/cm/dra/plugin/plugin.go#L67). It looks heavier, but it'll be called only after connection drop, which shouldn't happen too often.

Reviewer: I think that's worse than using `Connect`:
- As it stands, it uses `grpc.Dial`, which is deprecated and perhaps worse than using an experimental API.
- It times out, whereas what we need is trying to connect forever until the connection really isn't needed anymore.
- It blocks until it times out, so you need to run it in a goroutine.

This actually brings me to another interesting question: at what point should the DRA manager stop trying to connect (no matter how it does that)?

Normally the answer would be "until it is told by the plugin manager that the plugin is not registered anymore" - but the DRA manager itself unregisters the plugin now, so it cannot use that as a signal.

Perhaps the DRA manager shouldn't unregister the plugin on a service connection loss? We then would have more states:
- A plugin is registered or not (tracked by plugin manager).
- While it is registered, it is usable or not (tracked by DRA manager).

We can trigger cleanup of ResourceSlices when it a plugin becomes unregistered or unusable and abort the cleanup when it becomes usable again. That should go a long way towards solving the problem that this PR is trying to address. The "deregistration" part is less important.

Reviewer: > I'd introduce a timeout.

And then what? We have to keep monitoring and retrying because that is what the kubelet did before.

Author: I was thinking about unregistering plugin completely, but you're right, we need to keep retrying unless we decide to break compatibility with the previous behaviour.

Author: > Will try to keep connection monitoring in the DRA code.

Done. PTAL. e2e needs to be done still, but it would be great if you can review the implementation and the documentation.

   and adds the plugin to the plugin manager’s desired state of the world, which
   triggers plugin re-registration.

> 6. If the plugin restarts it must explicitly re-register with the Kubelet. This

Reviewer: Why? I thought we wanted to support the scenario where the driver consists of a permanently running "registration" side car and only the service container restarts.

Reviewer: Let's assume that gRPC reconnects. Then this PR introduces a regression. Previously, a plugin was allowed to restart the service and the kubelet would continue talking to it when it comes back. Now we introduce "plugin must register again" as a new requirement which might not be implemented by all plugins.

Reviewer: Do you agree that we need to handle this, even if it makes the implementation more complex?

Author: Yes, I agree with this. Will update the documention.

   ensures that the Kubelet only interacts with plugins that are fully initialized
   and healthy.

> **Warning**: Monitoring the plugin connection is only supported for DRA at the moment.

Reviewer: Let's put this directly after "Monitoring Plugin Connection".

**Warning**: Such a seamless upgrade is only supported for DRA at the moment.

## Monitoring plugin connection

> If plugin drops GRPC connection with Kubelet, it gets automatically unregistered

Reviewer: GRPC -> gRPC

Can you add some more meat to this section? How does it work technically? What timeouts are there?

This document is mostly for developers, not users.

Author: Added, PTAL.
